\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-      
@c %**start of header
@setfilename trlan.info
@settitle TRLAN User Guide
@setchapternewpage on
@finalout
@c %**end of header

@comment version number
@set TRLVERSION 1.0
@set DOCVERSION 1.0

@ifinfo
Copyright (C) 1999 Kesheng Wu and Horst Simon

Users guide for TRLAN version:  Edition @value{DOCVERSION}
@value{TRLVERSION}
@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided that the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore
@end ifinfo

@c Smaller amounts of whitespace for the 8.5 by 11 inch format.
@c @tex
@c \global\chapheadingskip = 15pt plus 4pt minus 2pt
@c \global\secheadingskip = 12pt plus 3pt minus 2pt
@c \global\subsecheadingskip = 9pt plus 2pt minus 2pt
@c \global\parskip 6pt plus 1pt
@c @end tex

@titlepage
@title{TRLAN User Guide}

@subtitle{Edition @value{DOCVERSION} for TRLAN version @value{TRLVERSION}}

@sp 2
March 1999
@sp 4
@author Kesheng Wu
@author Horst Simon
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll

This work was supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of
Laboratory Policy and Infrastructure Management, of the U.S. Department
of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC03-76SF00098.

The development and testing of this software used resources of the
National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, which is supported
by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy.

@c @page
@c @vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@c @center{Copyright @copyright{} 1999 Kesheng Wu and Horst Simon}
@c @sp 5
@end titlepage

@contents

@iftex
@headings off
@everyheading TRLAN Ver @value{TRLVERSION} @| @| @thispage
@end iftex

@ifinfo
@node    Top,       Overview,      (dir),    (dir)
@comment node-name, next,          previous, up
@top
This is edition @value{DOCVERSION} of the user's guide for TRLAN version
@value{TRLVERSION}.  It describes how to use TRLAN to solve real
symmetric eigenvalue problems.  The main focus is on how to set up the
data required by TRLAN so that TRLAN can do its job.  It also includes
information on installation and debugging.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Overview::
         a short overview of what TRLAN is designed to do.
* Installation::
         how to install the package and run the examples.
* Example::
         this short example demonstrates the basic concepts.
* TRL_INFO module::
         information used/produced by TRLAN is packaged in this module.
* TRLAN interface::
         details of @code{trlan} calling sequence and the operator
         interface. 
* Parameters::
         recommendations on how to set the parameters.
* Miscellaneous::
         workspace size requirement, interface for other languages, et al.
* About Lanczos::
         list of books on the Lanczos algorithm and related journal
         papers on restarting the Lanczos algorithm.
* Index::
@end menu

@node    Overview, Installation,   Top,      Top
@comment node-name,     next,      previous, up
@chapter Overview

@c index Thick-restart Lanczos, dynamic thick-restart
TRLAN is a program designed to find a small number of extreme
eigenvalues and their corresponding eigenvectors of a real symmetric
matrix.  Denote the matrix as
@ifinfo
A,
@end ifinfo
@tex
$A$,
@end tex
the eigenvalue as
@ifinfo
lambda,
@end ifinfo
@tex
$\lambda$,
@end tex
and the corresponding eigenvector as
@ifinfo
x,
@end ifinfo
@tex
$x$,
@end tex
they are defined by the following equation,

@ifinfo
A x = lambda x.
@end ifinfo
@tex
$$A x = \lambda x.$$
@end tex

@cindex algorithm
There are a number of different implementations of the Lanczos algorithm
available@footnote{Many mathematical packages are available from NETLIB
@code{(http://www.netlib.org/)} and ACM TOMS
@code{(http://www.acm.org/toms/)}.}.  Why another one?  Our main
motivation is to develop a specialized version that only target the case
where one wants both eigenvalues and eigenvectors of a large real
symmetric eigenvalue problems that can not use the shift-and-invert
scheme.  In this case the standard non-restarted Lanczos algorithm
requires one to store a large number of Lanczos vectors which can cause
storage problem and make each iteration of the method very expensive.
The underlying algorithm of TRLAN is a dynamic thick-restart Lanczos
algorithm.  Like all restarted methods, the user can choose how many
vectors can be generated at once.  Typically, the user choose a moderate
size so that all Lanczos vectors can be stored in core.  This allows the
restarted methods to execute efficiently.  This implementation of the
thick-restart Lanczos method also uses the latest restarting technique,
it is very effective in reducing the time required to compute a desired
solutions compared to similar restarted Lanczos schemes, e.g.,
@cite{ARPACK}@footnote{ARPACK can be found at
@code{http://www.caam.rice.edu/software/ARPACK/}.}.

@cindex Lanczos basis
When solving most problems, the three most time-consuming procedures in
the Lanczos method are the matrix-vector multiplication,
re-orthogonalization and computation of the Ritz vectors.  To make this
package as small as possible, we have delegated the task of performing
the matrix-vector multiplication to the user.  This is a reasonable
approach because there is simply too many possible ways of performing
the operation and the user usually can construct a specialize version
that is better than a generic matrix-vector multiplication routine.  In
addition, there are high quality matrix-vector multiplication routines
available as parts of larger packages, for example, P_SPARSLIB, AZTEC,
BLOCKSOLVE and PETSc, see @ref{operator interface}, for details.  To
reduce the amount of the time spent in re-orthogonalization, we only
perform re-orthogonalization if it is necessary.  The Ritz vectors are
computed as during the restarting process, in TRLAN, we only compute
those that are determined to be needed.  This reduces the number of Ritz
vectors computed.  To compute them efficiently, we call the @code{BLAS}
library to perform the actual computation.

@cindex Fortran 90, advantages
The program is implemented in @code{Fortran 90}.  The main advantages of
using @code{Fortran 90} compared to @code{Fortran 77} is that
@code{Fortran 90} offers dynamic memory management which make it more
flexible in terms of allocating temporary work arrays.  If there is an
array not used for other task, it can be passed into TRLAN, else the
user can simple let TRLAN allocate its own work arrays.  TRLAN internal
allocate all the space it requires up front to avoid repeated call to
allocated small pieces of workspace.

@cindex C/C++
Similar to other languages, such as C/C++, @code{Fortran 90} offers data
encapsulation which makes it convenient to pass a significant amount of
information cleanly.  TRLAN packages a large amount of information in a
single object to reduce the size of the external user interface.
@xref{TRL_INFO module}, for details.  A significant advantage of using
@code{Fortran} compared to C/C++ is the ease of using computational
libraries such as @code{BLAS} and @code{LAPACK}.  In fact, most
numerical computations of TRLAN are performed using those library
functions.  Because most machines have vendor optimized @code{BLAS} and
@code{LAPACK}, being able to effectively use them is crucial to the
effectiveness of TRLAN package.

@code{Fortran 90} also provides some utility functions such as query
function for the machine precision, random number generator and timing
functions.  They make the program more portable across different
platforms.

Parts of this document contains details about the software package which
may not be of interest to every user.  Here are some advice on how to
use this document.  If you just want to get a feel of how TRLAN looks
like in a program, take a look at @ref{Example} or the examples come
with the software package.  Chapter 3 contains a short example that uses
mostly default parameters.  To assert more control over TRLAN, see
@ref{TRL_INFO module}, and @ref{TRLAN interface}.  If you are somewhat
puzzled about how to choose the parameters, see @ref{Parameters}, for
our recommendations.  If you don't use @code{Fortran 90}, see @ref{other
languages}, for what to do.  For most users, there is no need to read
everything in @ref{elements}, and @ref{error code}.  If you read the
entire document and are still puzzled, contact the authors, see
@ref{contacting authors}.


@node    Installation, Example,   Overview,      Top
@comment node-name,     next,          previous, up
@chapter Installation
@cindex installation

The source code of the package is available at

@center @code{http://www.nersc.gov/~kewu/trlan.tar.gz}.

@noindent This document is distributed with the package and is
also separately available at

@center @code{http://www.nersc.gov/~kewu/ps/trlan-ug.ps}.  

@noindent The package may be unpacked by
@smallexample
tar -xzf trlan.tar.gz
@end smallexample
@noindent If you @code{tar} program does not recognize flag @code{z},
you can unpack it in two steps
@smallexample
gunzip trlan.tar.gz
tar -xf trlan.tar
@end smallexample
@noindent After this, the files in the package will be unpacked into a
directory called @file{TRLan}.

To install the package, you will need a @code{Fortran 90} compiler, the
@code{BLAS} and @code{LAPACK} libraries.  On parallel machines, MPI is
also needed.  The compiler name and the options used are specified in
the file called @file{Make.inc}.  A number of examples are provided in
the file for different machines.  If your compiler name and library
locations are same as one of the examples, you can uncomment the
section, comment out the default values, and use the settings.  If your
compiler has a different name or the libraries are located at a
different place, you will need to modify the file to refer to their
correct values.  The package may be compiled into one of the two library
files @code{libtrlan.a} and @code{libtrlan_mpi.a} where the former is
the sequential version of the package and the latter is the parallel
version.  To generate them go to @file{TRLan} and type
@smallexample
make libtrlan.a
@exdent or
make libtrlan_mpi.a
@end smallexample

To compile the examples, go to the appropriate subdirectory in
@file{examples}.  If you are on a sequential or a shared memory computer
and there is no subdirectory that matches your computer, the source code
in the @code{SUN} directory can be used.  The examples in @file{T3E} and
@file{psp} can be run on parallel machines that support MPI.
@file{Makefile} in the @file{T3E} and @file{psp} directories are only
tested on a Cray T3E.  They will need modification in order to be used
elsewhere.  The examples in directory @file{psp} also need a special
supporting library called P_SPARSLIB, read the file @file{README} before
try to use it.

There are three examples in most example directories (except
@file{psp}), @code{simple}, @code{simple77} and @code{simplec}.  These
are three programs should be doing the same thing using three different
languages.  The executables can be generated by @code{make}
@smallexample
make simple simplec simple77
@end smallexample
They should output the same eigenvalues, however the actual printout may
differ slightly due floating-point round-off errors.

For further questions, consult the @file{README} files in the
directories.  To report errors in the installation procedure or suggest
improvements, the authors can be reached at @code{kwu@@lbl.gov} (Kesheng
Wu) and @code{hdsimon@@lbl.gov} (Horst Simon).


@node    Example, TRL_INFO module,  Installation,      Top
@chapter A small example

This is a simple example in @code{Fortran 90}.  It is short because we
have used a very simple matrix and used default parameters wherever
possible.  It uses MPI to handle data communication required by TRLAN.
This example comes with the distribution of the source code in directory
@file{examples/T3E}.  The name of the file is @file{s1.f90} and on T3E
is can be compiled by @code{make s1} which generates the executable
@code{s1}.

@cindex small example
@cindex example
@smallexample
!!! a really simple example of how to use TRLAN
Program simple
  Use trl_info
  Use trl_interface
  Implicit None
  Include 'mpif.h'
  ! local variable declaration
  Integer, Parameter :: nrow=100, lohi=-1, ned=5, maxlan=40, mev=10
  Double Precision :: eval(mev), evec(nrow, mev)
  Type(trl_info_t) :: info
  Integer :: i
  External diag_op  ! name of the matrix-vector multiplication routine
  Call MPI_INIT(i)  ! initialize MPI
  ! initialize info -- tell TRLAN to compute NED smallest eigenvalues
  Call trl_init_info(info, nrow, maxlan, lohi, ned)
  ! call TRLAN to compute the eigenvalues
  Call trlan(diag_op, info, nrow, mev, eval, evec, nrow)
  Call trl_print_info(info, nrow+nrow)
  If (info%my_pe .Eq. 0) Then
     write (6, FMT=100) (i, eval(i), i=1,info%nec)
  End If
100 Format('E(', I1, ') = ', 1PG25.17)
  Call MPI_finalize(i)
End Program simple
!!!
! a simple matrix-vector multiplications routine
! defines a diagonal matrix with value (1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, ...)
!!!
Subroutine diag_op(nrow, ncol, xin, ldx, yout, ldy)
  Implicit None
  Integer, Intent(in) :: nrow, ncol, ldx, ldy
  Double Precision, Dimension(ldx*ncol), Intent(in) :: xin
  Double Precision, Dimension(ldy*ncol), Intent(out) :: yout
  Include 'mpif.h'
  ! local variables
  Integer :: i, j, ioff, joff, doff
  Call MPI_COMM_RANK(MPI_COMM_WORLD, i, j)
  doff = nrow*i
  Do j = 1, ncol
     ioff = (j-1)*ldx
     joff = (j-1)*ldy
     Do i = 1, nrow
        yout(joff+i) = (doff+i)*(doff+i)*xin(ioff+i)
     End Do
  End Do
End Subroutine diag_op
@end smallexample

There are two parts in this example, the main program and the
matrix-vector multiplication subroutine.  The main program sets up the
@code{info} variable to carry information to and from TRLAN, calls
TRLAN, and prints the information carried out in @code{info} and the
eigenvalues computed.  Here is a short explanation of the arguments to
@code{trl_init_info}.

@smallexample
  call trl_init_info(info,      ! the variable to be set
                     nrow=100,  ! there are 100 rows on each processor
                     maxlan=40, ! maximum Lanczos basis size is 40
                     lohi=-1,   ! compute the smallest eigenvalues
                     ned=5)     ! compute 5 eigenvalues
@end smallexample

@noindent  The calling sequence of TRLAN is fairly simple because all
the gory details are hidden inside @code{info}.  The following listing
describes the information required by TRLAN to solve an eigenvalue
problem.

@smallexample
  call trlan(diag_op,           ! matrix-vector multiplication routine
             info,              ! what eigenvalues to compute, etc.
             nrow,              ! 100 rows on this processor
             mev,               ! number of eigenpairs can be stored in
                                ! eval and evec
             eval,              ! real(8) :: eval(mev)
                                ! array to store eigenvalue
             evec,              ! real(8) :: evec(lde,mev)
                                ! array to store the eigenvectors
             lde)               ! the leading dimension of evec
@end smallexample

@noindent The content of @code{info} and the eigenvalues are printed
separately.  The content of @code{info} is printed by calling
@code{trl_print_info} which accepts two arguments, @code{info} to be
printed and the number of floating-point operations used for one
matrix-vector multiplication on this processor.  The second parameter is
needed because the matrix-vector multiplication is user-supplied.  The
information is used to compute the speed of the matrix-vector
multiplication and the speed of the whole program.  It can be ignored,
in which case @code{trl_print_info} will leave the related fields blank.

The short matrix-vector multiplication routine, @code{diag_op}, performs
multiplication with a very simple matrix, @code{diag(1, 4, 9, ...)}.
The example tries to find 5 smallest eigenvalues of this matrix, 1, 4,
9, 16, 25.  The following is the output from a run on a T3E/900 located
at the National Energy Research Supercomputing Center@footnote{Information
about the National Energy Research Supercomputing Center can be found on
the web at @code{http://www.nersc.gov/}.}.

@cindex print, long
@cindex long output
@c out from the example on 4 PEs of T3E/900 at NERSC
@smallexample
                                      1998/09/24 18:37:16.834 (-07:00)
 TRLAN execution summary (exit status = 0 ) on PE  0
Number of SMALLEST eigenpairs:          6 (computed),      5 (wanted)
Times the operator is applied:        847 (MAX:         2000 )
Problem size:                         100 (PE:   0),     400 (Global)
Convergence tolerance:          1.490E-08 (rel),   2.384E-03 (abs)
Maximum basis size:                    40
Restarting scheme:                      0
Number of re-orthogonalizations       847
Number of (re)start loops:             36
Number of MPI processes:                4
Number of eigenpairs locked:            0
OP(MATVEC):                 9.35440E-03 sec,      1.81091E+01 MFLOPS
Re-Orthogonalization:       2.12016E-01 sec,      4.68742E+01 MFLOPS
Restarting:                 2.36795E-01 sec,      2.02369E+01 MFLOPS
TRLAN on this PE:           5.29851E-01 sec,      3.00020E+01 MFLOPS
 -- Global summary --
             Overall     MATVEC    Re-orth    Restart
Time(ave) 5.2985E-01 9.4129E-03 2.1143E-01 2.3685E-01
Rate(tot) 1.2001E+02 7.1990E+01 1.8801E+02 8.0930E+01
E(1) =   0.99999999997742750
E(2) =    3.9999999999816311
E(3) =    8.9999999999916049
E(4) =    16.000000000026944
E(5) =    25.000000000089663
E(6) =    36.000000000367905
@end smallexample

In short, to use TRLAN to find some extreme eigenvalues, the user
defines a matrix-vector multiplication routine with the same interface
as @code{diag_op}, calls @code{trl_init_info} to specify what
eigenvalues to compute and calls @code{trlan} to perform the bulk of the
computation.  The remainder of this manual will explain the user
interface and how to control TRLAN in more detail.  How to Write a
particular matrix-vector multiplication for an operator is beyond the
scope of this manual.  Some packages containing distributed
matrix-vector multiplications routines are listed in @ref{operator
interface}.

@node    TRL_INFO module,  TRLAN interface,  Example,      Top
@chapter TRL_INFO module

The example in previous chapter uses two modules, TRL_INFO and
TRL_INTERFACE.  As the name suggested, TRL_INTERFACE contains the user
interface for accessing TRLAN.  The module TRL_INFO only contains the
definition of the @code{Fortran 90} derived type @dfn{TRL_INFO_T}.  To
make it easy to access, we have provided six access functions,
@code{trl_init_info}, @code{trl_set_debug}, @code{trl_set_iguess},
@code{trl_set_checkpoint}, @code{trl_print_info}, and
@code{trl_terse_info}.  The first four are for manipulate input
parameters to TRLAN and the last two are for printing the content of
@dfn{TRL_INFO_T}.  We will discuss these access functions in this
chapter.  The remaining interface functions are described in the next
Chapter.  The last two sections of this chapter may be skipped if the
reader is only seeking information on how to use the package.

@menu
* initialization::
        user interface of @code{trl_init_info}
* debug parameters::
        user interface of @code{trl_set_debug}
* initial guess::
        user interface of @code{trl_set_iguess}
* checkpointing::
        user interface of @code{trl_set_checkpoint}
* printing::
        user interface of @code{trl_print_info} and
        @code{trl_terse_info}
* elements::
        listing of the elements of @code{TRL_INFO_T}
* error code::
        the error code of TRLAN and recommended recovery schemes
@end menu


@node    initialization,  debug parameters,  TRL_INFO module, TRL_INFO module
@section Initialization

This initialization routine is equivalent to a generator function in
@code{C++}.  It is intended to be called before any other TRLAN
functions.  Any parameter not explicitly set by the caller is set to its
default value and all internal counters are set to zero.  Its
@code{Fortran 90} @code{interface} block is as follows,

@cindex eigenvalue problem, set up
@cindex set up
@cindex info, initialization
@smallexample
     Subroutine trl_init_info(info, nrow, mxlan, lohi, ned, tol,&
          & trestart, maxmv, mpicom)
       Use trl_info
       Integer, Intent(in) :: lohi, mxlan, ned, nrow
       Integer, Intent(in), Optional :: maxmv, mpicom, trestart
       Real(8), Intent(in), Optional :: tol
       Type(TRL_INFO_T), Intent(out) :: info
     End Subroutine trl_init_info
@end smallexample

@noindent We have seen the mandatory arguments in the example, however,
there are four optional arguments that were not used before.  For
completeness, we will give a short description of all arguments here.

@table @code

@item info:
The @code{Fortran 90} derived type that will carry the information to
the @code{trlan} subroutine.  It is set by this subroutine.  Any prior
content will be cleared.

@item nrow:
The @emph{local} problem size.  The vectors are assumed to be
distributed conformally, i.e., if 10 elements of a Lanczos vector are
located on a processor, the same 10 elements of all other Lanczos
vectors are located on the same processor.  The variable @code{nrow}
refers to the number of rows located on the current processor.  It may
vary from processor to processor.

@item maxlan:
The maximum Lanczos basis size.  This determines the maximum memory
requirement of @code{trlan}.  The restarted Lanczos algorithm will store
up to @code{maxlan} Lanczos vectors and one (1) residual vector.  An
additional memory of size @code{maxlan*(maxlan+10)} is required to
perform the Rayleigh-Ritz projection to compute the approximate
solutions.  Generally, the larger @code{maxlan} is, the fewer
matrix-vector multiplications are needed.  @xref{basis size}, for further
discussion on this parameter.

@item lohi:
This parameter indicates which end of the spectrum to compute.  The
Lanczos algorithm is only able to compute the extreme eigenvalues
effectively.  The choices are either to compute the smallest ones
(@code{lohi} < 0), or the largest ones (@code{lohi} > 0), or whatever
converges first (@code{lohi} = 0).

@item ned:
The number of eigenvalues and eigenvectors desired.


@exdent The parameters, @code{nrow}, @code{maxlan}, @code{lohi}, and
@code{ned}, are mandatory when calling @code{trl_init_info}.  The
following parameters are optional because a reasonable value can be
determined by @code{trl_init_info}.

@item tol:
The relative tolerance on the residual norms.  The Lanczos algorithm
computes the approximate solution to the eigenvalue problem.  As more
steps are taken, the solutions become more accurate.  For symmetric
eigenvalue problems, the residual norm is one of the most commonly used
measure of the solution accuracy.  If the approximate eigenvalue is
@ifinfo
@code{lambda},
@end ifinfo
@tex
$\lambda$,
@end tex
and the approximate eigenvector is 
@ifinfo
@code{x},
@end ifinfo
@tex
$x$,
@end tex
the residual norm is defined to be
@ifinfo
@code{r = || A x - lambda x ||}.
@end ifinfo
@tex
$r =  \Vert A x - \lambda x \Vert $.
@end tex
In TRLAN, the convergence test is relative the norm of the matrix
@ifinfo
@code{A}.
@end ifinfo
@tex
$ A $.
@end tex
If
@ifinfo
@code{r < tol || A ||},
@end ifinfo
@tex
$$ r < tol \Vert A \Vert,$$
@end tex
then the approximate solution is considered converged.  If this argument
is not present, it is set to the square root of the unit round-off
error.  If the 8-byte IEEE floating-point arithmetic is used, this
default value is roughly
@ifinfo
1.49E-8.
@end ifinfo
@tex
$1.49 \times 10^{-8}$.
@end tex

@item restart:
The flag to indicate which thick-restart scheme to use.  In version
@value{TRLVERSION} of TRLAN, there are five choices for this parameter,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5.  If this parameter is not provided, the default choice is
0 which is treated same as 1 in the current implementation.
@xref{restarting scheme}, for further discussion on this parameter.

@item maxmv:
The maximum number of matrix-vector multiplications allowed.  The
purpose of this parameter is usually to make sure the program stop
eventually in case of stagnation.  The default value is @code{ned*ntot}
where @code{ntot} the global problem size.

@item mpicom:
The MPI communicator to be used by @code{trlan}.  This parameter is only
meaningful if MPI is used.  If the sequential version is used, this
variable is simply ignored internally.  If MPI is used and this variable
is not set, @code{trl_init_info} will duplicate @code{MPI_COMM_WORLD}
and use the resulting communicator for its internal communication
operations.

@end table

@node    debug parameters,  initial guess,  initialization, TRL_INFO module
@section Setting debug parameters

There are cases we would like to monitor the progress of the restarted
Lanczos algorithm.  We can do this by setting a few logging parameters.
Since the debug information may be voluminous, @code{trlan} writes them
to files.  Each MPI process will write its own debug information to a
separate file.  The name of the file and how much debug information to
write is controlled by calling @code{trl_set_debug}.

@cindex set debug flags
@smallexample
     Subroutine trl_set_debug(info, msglvl, iou, file)
       Use trl_info
       implicit none
       Type(TRL_INFO_T), intent(inout) :: info
       integer, intent(in) :: msglvl, iou
       Character*(*), Optional :: file
     End Subroutine trl_set_debug
@end smallexample
@cindex info, modifying

@table @code

@item info:
The @code{TRL_INFO_T} type variable to be modified.  The function
@code{trl_init_info} should have been called before calling
@code{trl_set_debug}.

@item msglvl:
This parameter controls how much debug information to print.
If it is zero or less, nothing is printed.  When its value is between 1
and 10, the larger it is, the more information is printed.  When it is
larger than 10, it has the same effect as 10.

The function @code{trl_init_info} sets it to zero as the default value.

@item iou:
The Fortran I/O unit number to be used when writing debug information.
The user should choose an I/O unit not used for anything else during the
time @code{trlan} is being used.

@code{Trl_init_info} sets it to 99 as the default value.

@item file:
The leading part of the debug file names.  The debug file names are form
by appending the MPI processor rank to this string.  In sequential
environment, MPI processor rank is always zero (0).  This is an optional
argument to @code{trl_set_debug}.  When it is not set, the corresponding
element of @code{TRL_INFO_T} is not changed.

@code{Trl_init_info} sets this elements to @file{TRL_LOG_} by default.

@end table

@node    initial guess, checkpointing, debug parameters, TRL_INFO module
@section Setting initial guess options

TRLAN program can either use a user-supplied initial guess, generate
an arbitrary initial guess or read a set of checkpoint file to get
starting vectors.  The thick-restart Lanczos may start with arbitrary
number of vectors, however, the starting vectors have to satisfy a
strict relation.  The simplest way to start the algorithm is to simply
provide one starting vector.  If the function @code{trl_set_iguess} is
not called, the starting vector is set to [1, ..., 1] by default.  The
checkpoint option is implemented to enable a user to continue improve
the accuracy of the solutions progressively.

@smallexample
     Subroutine trl_set_iguess(info, nec, iguess, oldcpf)
       Use trl_info
       Implicit None
       Type(TRL_INFO_T) :: info
       Integer, Intent(in) :: iguess, nec
       Character(*), Intent(in), Optional :: oldcpf
     End Subroutine trl_set_iguess
@end smallexample

@table @code

@item info:
The @code{TRL_INFO_T} type variable to be modified.  The function
@code{trl_init_trl} should have been called before calling
@code{trl_set_iguess}.

@item nec:
The number of eigenvalues and eigenvectors already converged.  If
@code{nec} is greater than zero (0), the first @code{nec} columns of
array @code{evec} should contain eigenvectors of the operator and the
first @code{nec} elements of @code{eval} should contain the
corresponding eigenvalues.  This is designed to allow the user to return
to @code{trlan} to compute more eigenvalues and eigenvectors.

@code{Trl_init_info} sets this value to zero to indicate no converged
eigenvalues.

@item iguess:
The parameter to indicate option for initial guess vector.
@table @code
@item <1:
TRLAN will generate an arbitrary starting vector for the Lanczos
algorithm.  If it is zero (0), vector [1, 1, ..., 1] is used.  When
@code{iguess} is less than zero, a random perturbations will be added to
this vector before it is taken as the starting vector.

@item 1:
The user has supplied a starting vector.  It will be used.

@item >1:
TRLAN will read a checkpoint file and use its content to start the
Lanczos process.  The idea of checkpoint is explained later.
@end table

@item oldcpf:
The leading portion of the existing checkpointing file names.  As with
the log files, the checkpoint files are named by concatenating this
leading portion and the MPI processor rank.  The default value set by
@code{trl_init_info} for this is @file{TRL_CHECKPOINT_}.

@end table

NOTE: Reading the checkpoint files are done through I/O unit
@code{cpio}.  @code{Trl_init_info} sets this value to 98 by default.  If
I/O unit is used for another task already, use @code{trl_set_checkpoint}
to set @code{cpio} to an unused I/O unit number.


@node    checkpointing, printing, initial guess, TRL_INFO module
@section Checkpointing
@cindex checkpointing

TRLAN has implemented a scheme of checkpointing to allow the user to
stop and restart.  The checkpoint files of the thick-restart Lanczos
algorithm contains all the information necessary for it to continue the
Lanczos iterations.  To minimize the size of the files, the checkpoint
files are written at the end of the restart process because the basis is
the smallest in size at this point.  For efficiency reasons, each MPI
processor writes its own checkpoint file in @code{FORTRAN} unformatted
form.  These checkpoint files can only be read on the same type of
machines and using the same number of MPI processors.  The function
@code{trl_set_iguess} controls whether the checkpoint files are read.
The following function controls when to write the checkpoint files.

@smallexample
     Subroutine trl_set_checkpoint(info, cpflag, cpio, file)
       Use trl_info
       Implicit None
       Type(TRL_INFO_T) :: info
       Integer, Intent(in) :: cpflag, cpio
       Character(*), Optional :: file
     End Subroutine trl_set_checkpoint
@end smallexample
@cindex info, modifying

@table @code

@item info:
The @code{TRL_INFO_T} type variable to be modified.  The function
@code{trl_init_trl} should have been called before calling
@code{trl_set_checkpoint}.

@item cpflag:
If this value is greater than zero, then TRLAN will write @code{cpflag}
set of checkpointing files in @code{maxmv} iterations.  If it is less or
equal to zero, no checkpoint file is written.  Checkpointing files are
only written if TRLAN runs correctly.  If @code{cpflag} is greater than
zero, at least one set of checkpoint files is written when TRLAN
completes successfully.  To debug the program, turn on verbose printing
by using @code{trl_set_debug}.

@code{Trl_init_info} sets this value to zero.

@item cpio:
The @code{FORTRAN} I/O unit number to be used for writing checkpoint
files.  The value of @code{cpio} is set to 98 by default
(@code{trl_init_info}).

@item file:
The leading portion of the checkpoint files.  The checkpoint file names
are formed by concatenating the value of this variable and the MPI
processor rank.  If this argument is not present internally, the
corresponding element of @code{TRL_INFO_T} is not modified.

@code{Trl_init_info} sets this variable to @file{TRL_CHECKPOINT_} by
default.

@end table

@node    printing, elements, checkpointing, TRL_INFO module
@section Printing functions

Upon returning from @code{trlan}, the user may wish to exam the progress
of @code{trlan}.  One simple way to do this is to printout the content
of @code{info}.  There are two printing functions @code{trl_print_info}
and @code{trl_terse_info}.  Function @code{trl_print_info} is the one
that printed the results in @ref{Example}.  The following is the same
information printed using @code{trl_terse_info}.

NOTE: The eigenvalues are not stored in @code{info}.  The following
printout is from a different run of the same example, there is slight
difference in time.

@cindex print, short
@cindex short output
@smallexample
MAXLAN:      40, Restart:       0,   NED:  -    5,     NEC:       6
MATVEC:     847,  Reorth:     847, Nloop:      36, Nlocked:       0
Ttotal:0.535910,    T_op:0.008962, Torth:0.209496,  Tstart:0.238200
@end smallexample
@c E(1) =    1.0000000000096725
@c E(2) =    3.9999999999967928
@c E(3) =    9.0000000000138165
@c E(4) =    16.000000000027473
@c E(5) =    25.000000000105661
@c E(6) =    36.000000000374833

The @code{Fortran 90} @code{interface} of the two subroutines are as
follows.

@cindex info, printing
@smallexample
     Subroutine trl_print_info(info, mvop)
       Use trl_info
       Implicit None
       Type(TRL_INFO_T), Intent(in) :: info
       Integer, Intent(in) :: mvop
     End Subroutine trl_print_info
@end smallexample

@smallexample
     Subroutine trl_terse_info(info, iou)
       Use trl_info
       Implicit None
       Type(TRL_INFO_T), Intent(in) :: info
       Integer, Intent(in) :: iou
     End Subroutine trl_terse_info
@end smallexample


@table @code

@item info:
The @code{TRL_INFO_T} variable to be printed.  In addition of keeping
track of how many eigenvalues have converged and how many are wanted.
There are significant amount of information about how many matrix-vector
multiplications have been used, how much time is used in various parts
of the program, and so forth.  The verbose version of the printing
function will printout most of the recorded information that are deemed
to be useful.  The terse version only printout the 12 most important
fields.

@item mvop:
The number of floating-point operations performed on one processor
during one matrix-vector multiplication.  This information is used by
the printing function @code{trl_print_info} to determine the speed of
the matrix-vector multiplication and the speed of the overall eigenvalue
program.  If this information is not present, the relevant fields are
left blank in the printout.  The variable @code{info} contains timing
information and floating-point operations performed inside the
@code{trlan}.  Since the matrix-vector multiplication is a user-supplied
function, the user has to provide information about its complexity.

@item iou:
The terse printing function @code{trl_terse_info} is allowed to print to
any valid @code{FORTRAN} I/O unit.  This is different from the verbose
printing function where the printout is always sent to the I/O unit
that is used for logging debugging information.

@end table

In addition to the differences mentioned already, the function
@code{trl_print_info} requires every processor to participate but
@code{trl_terse_info} can be called by each processor individually.
Because of this reason, @code{trl_print_info} can provide global
performance information but not @code{trl_terse_info}.

The verbose version of the printout is designed to be self-explanatory.
The rate fields for floating-point operations are in MFLOPS.  The rate
of @code{Read} and @code{Write} refers to the speed of reading and
writing checkpoint files, they are in MegaBytes per second.  Since the
simple example shown does not use checkpointing, no information
regarding @code{Read} and @code{Write} is presented in the printout.

The heading for the terse version of the printout is bit cryptic.  They
are 

@table @code

@item MAXLAN:
The maximum Lanczos basis size.

@item Restart:
The flag of restarting scheme to be used, 0, ..., 5.

@item NED:
Number of eigenvalues desired.  It also contains an one-character sign
which can be @code{+}, @code{-}, or @code{0} to indicate which end of
the spectrum is being computed.

@item NEC:
Number of eigenvalues converged.

@cindex MATVEC used
@item MATVEC:
number of times the operator has been applied, i.e., the number of
matrix-vector multiplications, also the number of iterations.

@item Reorth:
Number of times re-orthogonalization has been applied.  Each time the
Gram-Schmidt procedure is called, this counter is incremented by one.

@item Nloop:
Number of outer/restarted iterations.

@cindex locked
@item Nlocked:
Number of Ritz pairs that have extremely small residual norms ( <
@code{epsilon} @code{|| A ||}).  Because the residual norms are so
small, we lock the Ritz pairs to reduce the among of arithmetic
operations needed in Rayleigh-Ritz projection.

@cindex timing
@item Ttotal:
The total time (seconds) used by TRLAN.

@item T_op:
The time (seconds) spent in performing matrix-vector multiplications.

@item Torth:
The time (seconds) spent in performing re-orthogonalizations.

@item Tstart:
The time (seconds) spent in restarting including performing
Rayleigh-Ritz projections.

@end table

@node    elements,  error code,  printing, TRL_INFO module
@section The elements of @code{TRL_INFO_T}

In some instances, it might be necessary to directly access the status
information in @code{info} rather than print out the information.
Whether @code{trlan} terminated because of some kind of error, the two
elements of @code{TRL_INFO_T} that are most like to be useful after
returning from @code{trlan} are @code{stat} and @code{nec}, where the
first one is the error flag of @code{trlan} and the second one indicates
how many eigenvalues and eigenvectors have converged.

The input parameters to TRLAN have appeared in the calling sequence of
@code{trl_init_info}, @code{trl_set_debug}, @code{trl_set_iguess} and
@code{trl_set_checkpoint} are described earlier in this chapter.  The
following are elements of @code{TRL_INFO_T} are counters set by
@code{trlan}.  To the user, they are part of the output from TRLAN.

@cindex TRL_INFO_T elements
@table @code

@item my_pe
@itemx npes
The PE number and the number of PEs.

@item ntot
The global size of the problem.
@tex
$ {\tt ntot} = \sum_{all PEs} {\tt nrow} $.
@end tex

@cindex MATVEC used
@item matvec
The number of matrix-vector multiplications used by the restarted
Lanczos algorithm.  It will not significantly exceed the value of
@code{maxmv}.

@item nloop
The number of restarting loops, i.e., the number of times @code{trlan}
has reached the maximum size and restarted.

@item north
The number of times the Gram-Schmidt process is invoked to perform
re-orthogonalization.

@item nrand
The number of times @code{trlan} has generated random vectors in attempt
to produce an vector that is orthogonal to the current basis vectors.

@cindex locked
@item locked
The number of eigenpairs that has extremely small residual norms ( <
@code{epsilon} @code{|| A ||}).  The accuracies of these eigenpairs can
not be further improve by more Rayleigh-Ritz projection, therefore they
are @emph{locked} to reduce arithmetic operations, they are only used to
perform re-orthogonalization but nothing else.  TRLAN locks not only the
wanted eigenpairs with small residual norm, it also locks unwanted ones
depending the restarting strategy.  The rational is that if they
converge quickly, it is not good idea to throw them away because they
will reappear in the next basis built.


@item clk_rate
The clock rate of as measured by @code{Fortran 90} intrinsic function
@code{system_clock}.

@item clk_max
The maximum clock ticks before it rolls over.

@cindex timing
@item clk_tot tick_t clk_op tick_o clk_orth tick_h clk_res tick_r
These set of integer and floating-point variables are used to keep track
of time spend in performing matrix-vector multiplication (@code{clk_op},
@code{tick_o}), re-orthogonalization (@code{clk_orth}, @code{tick_h}),
restarting (@code{clk_res}, @code{tick_r}), and the whole @code{trlan}
(@code{clk_tot}, @code{tick_t}).  The four integer counters,
@code{clk_op}, @code{clk_orth}, @code{clk_res}, and @code{clk_tot}, are
output from @code{Fortran 90} intrinsic function @code{system_clock}.
Since it is likely the integer counters will overflow in some cases,
each of them has a floating-point counterpart.  If they become larger
than a quarter of the maximum counter value @code{clk_max}, they are
added to the floating-point counters and reset to zero.

@cindex op count
@item flop rflp flop_h rflp_h flop_r rflp_r
These set of counters are for counting the number of floating-point
operations used by TRLAN.  @code{Flop} and @code{rflp} are for counting
the total floating pointer operations excluding those used by
matrix-vector multiplications.  @code{Flop_h} and @code{rflp_h} are for
counting the re-orthogonalization procedure.  @code{Flop_r} and
@code{rflp_r} count operations used in restarting.  The integer
counters are used initially until they become larger than
@code{clk_max/4}.  Once they become too large, their values are added to
the corresponding floating-point counter and they are reset to zero.
Since the matrix-vector multiplication routine is supplied by the user,
TRLAN can not account for the floating-point operations used in that
procedure.

@cindex convergence factor
@item crat tmv tres trgt
This set of variables are used to track the convergence factor of the
eigenvalue method.  The variable @code{crat} is the convergence factor.
It is measured after @code{tmv} number of matrix-vector multiplications
are used.  The value of the target at @code{tmv} was @code{tres}.
The convergence factor is updated as follows.  Among the Ritz values,
search for the one that is closest to @code{trgt}.  This Ritz value is
regarded as the updated version of the previous target Ritz value.  Let
@code{res} be the residual norm of the Ritz value, the convergence
factor is computed as @code{crat} = Exp(Log(@code{res / tres}) /
(@code{matvec - tmv})).

After @code{crat} is updated, the current target value is identified as
the first Ritz value that is not converged yet.  The value of @code{tmv}
and the corresponding residual norm @code{tres} are recorded.

@item anrm
The estimated norm of the matrix.  This is the largest absolute value of
any Ritz value ever computed by TRLAN.  After a number of steps, this is
a good estimate of the matrix 2-norm.  This variable is primarily used
in the convergence test.  If the user specifies a tolerance @code{tol},
all the Ritz pairs with residual norm less than @code{tol * anrm} are
considered converged.

@item stat
The error flag.  The next section describes the meaning of the error
codes in detail.

@c end of table of elements of TRL_INFO_T
@end table


@node    error code, , elements, TRL_INFO module
@section TRLAN error code

This section lists all error numbers defined in TRLAN and discusses
possible remedies to the errors.  Currently (TRLAN version
@value{TRLVERSION}), defines the follow error numbers,

@cindex troubleshooting
@cindex error code
@table @code
@item 0
No error.

It is possible that @code{trlan} has not computed all wanted eigenpairs,
check the value of @code{nec} to see exactly how many wanted eigenpairs
have converged.  In case you have not computed all wanted eigenpairs,
the possible solutions are:
@itemize @bullet
@item
If checkpoint files were written, restart with the checkpoint files.

@item
If no checkpoint files were written, make a linear combination of the
approximate eigenvectors and use the resulting vector as the initial
guess.  In addition, make sure to set appropriate options with
@code{trl_set_checkpoint} to generate checkpoint files for future use.

@item
Increase the maximum basis size @code{maxlan}, @xref{basis size} for
more details.

@item
Increase the maximum number of iterations allowed @code{maxmv},
@xref{maximum iterations} for more details.

@item
Use a different restarting strategy, @xref{restarting scheme} for more
details.
@end itemize

@item -1
The internal record of local problem size (@code{nloc}) does not match
the value of @code{nrow} used when calling @code{trlan}.  Most likely
the user has used the @code{info} variable defined for a different
problem.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Make sure @code{trl_init_info} is called before
@code{trlan} and the arguments to both functions are correct for the
intended eigenvalue problem.

@item -2
The leading dimension of the eigenvector array @code{evec} is smaller
than local problem size, @code{lde < nrow}.  There isn't enough space in
@code{evec} to store the eigenvectors correctly.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Allocate the array @code{evec} with leading
dimension larger or equal to @code{nrow}.

@item -3
The array size of @code{eval} is too small to store the eigenvalues,
@code{mev < info%ned}.  There isn't enough columns in @code{evec}
either.

@cindex workspace size problems
@noindent @sc{Solution}: Increase the size of array @code{eval} and
increase the number of columns in @code{evec}.

@item -4
TRLAN failed to allocate space for storing the projection matrix, etc..
The size of this work array (internally called @code{misc}) is
@code{maxlan * (maxlan + 10)}.  TRLAN tries to allocate its own
workspace if the user has not provided enough workspace to store the
Lanczos basis vectors and the projection matrix, et al.

@noindent @sc{Solution}:
@itemize @bullet
@item
If there is addition workspace not used, given TRLAN more workspace.
@item
Decrease the size of @code{maxlan}.  This will decrease the among of
workspace required.
@item
If you have control over the swap file/partition size, increase it will
also solve this problem.
@end itemize

@item -5
TRLAN failed to allocate space to store the Lanczos vectors.  The
workspace (internally called @code{base}) size required here is
@code{(maxlan + 1 - mev) * nrow}.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: See solutions for error code @code{-4}.

@item -11
TRLAN does not have enough workspace to perform Gram-Schmidt procedure
which is used to perform re-orthogonalization.  This should not happen
unless the caller directly calls lower level routine @code{trlanczos}
with insufficient workspace.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Increase workspace provided.

@item -12
TRLAN does not have enough workspace to compute eigenvalues of a
symmetric tridiagonal matrix.  This should not happen unless the caller
directly uses the lower level routine @code{trlanczos} with insufficient
workspace.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Increase workspace provided.

@item -101
The orthogonalization routine of @code{TRLAN} does not have enough
workspace.  This should not happen unless @code{trl_orth} is directly
called outside of TRLAN with insufficient workspace.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Increase workspace provided.

@item -102
The norm of the residual vector of Lanczos iterations is not a set of
valid finite floating-point numbers.  Unless the operator norm is
exceeding large, say large than @code{1E160}, this error code should not
be generated.  If it is, normally it is an indication of other errors.
For example, the workspace given by the user is not as large as the user
indicated to @code{trlan}, the array @code{evec} is actually smaller
than @code{(lde, mev)}, the first @code{nec} columns of @code{evec} are
not orthonormal vectors on input, or you have encounter a bug in TRLAN
or one of the libraries used by TRLAN.

@cindex failure due to workspace
@noindent @sc{Solution}:
@itemize @bullet
@item
Make sure the workspace array given to @code{trlan} is as large as
claimed, i.e., the actual size of @code{wrk} is at least as large as
@code{lwrk}.  If @code{wrk} is present but not @code{lwrk}, the actual
size of @code{wrk} should be no less than @code{mev}.
@item
Make sure there is enough space to store the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors even if you think @code{trlan} is not going to compute all
the eigenvectors because @code{trlan} uses the space in @code{evec} to
store the Lanczos vectors during its computations.
@item
If the initial @code{nec} is not zero, make sure that the
known eigenvectors are stored in the first @code{nec} columns of
@code{evec} and the eigenvalues in the first @code{nec} elements of
@code{eval}.
@end itemize

The above solution should be considered applicable to all the following
error conditions.  If you have checked everything suggested here, then
you may have found an error in TRLAN program.  Report the problem to the
authors.

@item -111
Insufficient workspace to one of a lower level routine used by TRLAN to
reduce the arrowhead of the projection matrix into tridiagonal matrix.
This should not happen unless the user directly calls the low level
routine.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Report the problem to the authors.

@item -112
TRLAN has failed to generate an orthogonal transformation to reduce the
projection matrix into a tridiagonal matrix, i.e., @code{LAPACK} routine
@code{dsytrd}/@code{ssytrd} has failed.  This is extremely unlikely to
happen.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Check to make sure you have a correct version
of the @code{LAPACK}.  If your @code{LAPACK} is installed correctly, see
suggestions for error @code{-102}.

@item -113
TRLAN has failed to apply the orthogonal transformation to reduce the
projection matrix into a tridiagonal matrix, i.e., @code{LAPACK} routine
@code{dorgtr}/@code{sorgtr} has failed.  This is extremely unlikely to
happen.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: See solutions to error @code{-102}.

@item -121
Insufficient workspace to compute the eigenvalues of a tridiagonal
matrix.  This error should not occur if the size of workspace @code{wrk}
passed to @code{trlan} is no less than @code{lwrk}.

@noindent @sc{Solution}:  See solutions to error @code{-102}.

@item -122
TRLAN has failed to computed the eigenvalues of a tridiagonal matrix.
This is extremely unlikely to happen.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: See solutions to error @code{-102}.

@item -131
Insufficient workspace to compute the eigenvectors of a tridiagonal
matrix.  This error should not occur if workspace of correct size was
provided to TRLAN.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: See solution to error @code{-102}.

@item -132
TRLAN has failed to compute the eigenvectors of the projection matrix,
more specifically, @code{LAPACK} routine @code{dstein}/@code{sstein} has
failed.  Normally, if this happens, TRLAN will switch to a different
method of computing the eigenvectors.  It is very unlikely the user will
see this error flag.  If it does show up, it might be an indication of
error in the program.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: See solutions to error @code{-102}.

@item -141
Insufficient workspace to compute the eigenvectors of a tridiagonal
matrix.  This error should not occur if workspace of correct size was
provided to TRLAN.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: See solutions to error @code{-102}.

@item -142
TRLAN has failed because @code{LAPACK} routine @code{dsyev}/@code{ssyev}
has failed to compute the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the projection
matrix.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Check to make sure @code{LAPACK} is installed
correctly.  See solution to error @code{-102}.

@item -143
@itemx -144
TRLAN is unable to match the Ritz values selected to be saved with the
eigenvalue found by @code{dsyev}/@code{ssyev}.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: See solutions to error @code{-102}.

@cindex Gram-Schmidt, failure
@cindex failure, Gram-Schmidt
@item -201
The Gram-Schmidt procedure is called with insufficient workspace.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Increase the workspace size.  If you did not
call @code{trl_cgs} directly, make sure workspace size @code{lwrk}
matches the actual size of @code{wrk} when calling @code{trlan}.

@item -202
@itemx -203
The Gram-Schmidt process has failed to orthogonalize the given vector to
the current basis vectors.  This is unlikely to happen.  If it does, it
indicates two possibly source of problem, the current basis vectors are
not orthogonal, or the random vectors generated by TRLAN fall in the
space spanned by the current Lanczos vectors.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: One possible solution to this problem is to call
@code{FORTRAN 90} random number generator to set each processor with a
different seed value.  For example, the following code segment will
cause @code{random_number} to generate different random numbers on each
processor the next time it is used and it also produces an random vector
as initial guess for the Lanczos iterations.

@smallexample
        call random_number(evec(1:nrow,1))
        do i = 1, info%my_pe
           call random_number(evec(1:nrow,1))
        end do
@end smallexample

If reseting the seed of the random number generator does not fix the
problem, then there might be a more serious problem.

See also solutions to error @code{-102}.

@item -204
The vector norm after orthogonalization is not a valid floating-point
number.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: See solutions to error @code{-102}.

@item -211
The leading dimension of the arrays are not large enough for storing the
vectors in a checkpoint file.  This error should have been caught
earlier as error @code{-2} unless the checkpoint files are not for the
same problem or not produced with the same number of processors.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Make sure the checkpoint files are generated on
the same type of machines and for the same problem using the same
number of processors.

@item -212
Unable to open checkpoint files to read.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Make sure the checkpoint files exist, the
names are correct, and the I/O unit number @code{cpio} is not used for
something else already.

@item -213
The array size stored in checkpoint file is different from passed in by
user.  The checkpoint file is probably for a different problem or was
generated with different number of processors.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Make sure the checkpoint files are generated
for the same problem and using the same number of processors.

@item -214
There are more vectors stored in the checkpoint file than
@code{maxlan}.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Increase the size of @code{maxlan}.

@item -215
Error was encountered while reading the content of the checkpoint files.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Make sure the checkpoint files are generated
for the same problem on the same type of machines.

@item -216
Error was encountered while trying to close the checkpoint file after
completed reading.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: This error probably can be ignored.  Consult
you system administrator.

@item -221
Unable to open checkpoint files for writing.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Make sure the I/O unit number specified to be
used for writing checkpoint files are not used for other tasks and make
sure you have permission to write files in the location where the
program is running.

@item -222
Error was encountered while writing the checkpoint files.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: Make sure there is enough space on the disk
to store the checkpoint files.  If there is @code{k} Lanczos vectors to
be written out, the number of bytes is @code{8*(2+2*k+nrow*(k+1))} for
each processor.  The maximum value for @code{k} is @code{maxlan}.

@item -223
Error was encountered while trying to close the checkpoint files after
write them.

@noindent @sc{Solution}: This error probably can be ignored.  Consult
you system administrator.

@c end of table of error codes
@end table

This list represents all error code defined in TRLAN version
@value{TRLVERSION}.  The function @code{trlan} should never return an
error code not listed here.  If you encountered one and you are sure
that all the arguments to TRLAN functions are correct, you have
uncovered a flaw in TRLAN, contact the authors with a description of
your problem.  A short example is always welcome.


@node    TRLAN interface,  Parameters, TRL_INFO module,      Top
@chapter Main function interfaces

The majority of the arithmetic computations to solve an eigenvalue
problem are executed in the main function of TRLAN package and the
user's own matrix-vector multiplication function.  This section gives a
more detail description of the interfaces of these two functions.

@menu
* interface of trlan::
* operator interface::
@end menu

@node interface of trlan, operator interface, , TRLAN interface
@section Interface of @code{trlan}

The main computation kernel of TRLAN package is named @code{trlan}.  We
have see a short description of its arguments in @ref{Example}.
To provide a different view of the interface, we show its @code{Fortran
90} @code{interface} block.

@cindex TRLAN interface
@smallexample
Subroutine trlan(op, info, nrow, mev, eval, evec, lde, wrk, lwrk)
  Use trl_info
  Implicit None
  Type(TRL_INFO_T) :: info
  Integer, Intent(in) :: lde, mev, nrow
  Integer, Intent(in), Optional :: lwrk
  Double Precision, Intent(inout) :: eval(mev), evec(lde,mev)
  Double Precision, Target, Dimension(:), Optional :: wrk
  Interface
     Subroutine OP(nrow, ncol, xin, ldx, yout, ldy)
       Integer, Intent(in) :: nrow, ncol, ldx, ldy
       Double Precision, Dimension(ldx*ncol), Intent(in) :: xin
       Double Precision, Dimension(ldy*ncol), Intent(out) :: yout
     End Subroutine OP
  End Interface
End Subroutine trlan
@end smallexample

@noindent Most of the arguments of this subroutine are explained before
in @ref{Example}.  However for completeness, we will list all
of them here.

@table @code

@cindex operator, argument
@item op
The operator routine.  It applies the operator on @code{xin} and stores
the resulting vectors in @code{yout}.  In linear algebra terms, this is
a matrix-vector multiplication routine.  The vectors to be multiplied
are stored in @code{xin} and the resulting vectors are stored in
@code{yout}.

@item info
A variable of @code{Fortran 90} derived type @code{TRL_INFO_T}.  It
carries the information to and from TRLAN.  @xref{TRL_INFO module}, for
more details.

@item nrow
The number of rows on this processor if the problem is distributed using
MPI, else the number of total rows in a Lanczos vector.

@item mev
The number of elements in array @code{eval} and the number of columns in
array @code{evec}.  It denotes the maximum number of eigenpairs that can
be stored in @code{eval} and @code{evec}.

@exdent NOTE: Since the array @code{evec} will be used internal to store
@code{mev} Lanczos vectors, even if you do not think TRLAN is able to
compute @code{mev} eigenvectors at the end, you still declare
@code{evec} as large as (@code{nrow, mev}).

@item eval
@item evec
The arrays used to store the eigenvalue values (@code{eval}) and the
eigenvectors (@code{evec}).  On entry to @code{trlan}, if
@code{info%nec} is greater than zero (0), the first @code{info%nec}
elements of @code{eval} shall contain the eigenvalues already known and
the first @code{info%nec} columns of @code{evec} shall contain the
corresponding eigenvectors.  These eigenpairs are assumed to have zero
residual norms and will not be modified by TRLAN.  On exit from
@code{trlan}, the converged solutions are stored in the front of
@code{eval} and @code{evec}, i.e.  the first @code{info%nec} eigenvalues
in @code{eval} contains the converged eigenvalues and the first
@code{info%nec} columns of @code{evec} are the corresponding
eigenvectors.

@item lde
The leading dimension of array @code{evec}.  It is expected to be no
less than @code{nrow}, otherwise the eigenvectors can not be stored
properly and @code{trlan} will abort with error code @code{info%stat =
-2}.

@cindex workspace, argument
@item wrk
@itemx lwrk
These two are optional arguments.  If both are present, @code{wrk} will
be used as workspace inside and @code{lwrk} shall be the number of
elements in array @code{wrk}.  TRLAN will try to use this workspace if
it is large enough for either @code{misc} (size @code{maxlan * (maxlan +
10)}) or @code{base} (size @code{(maxlan + 1 - mev) * nrow}).  If
@code{wrk} is present but not @code{lwrk}, the workspace size is assumed
to be @code{mev}.  It does not make sense to have only @code{lwrk}
without argument @code{wrk}.  If it is the case, @code{lwrk} is ignored.

If argument @code{wrk} is present and there is enough space to store the
residual norms of the solutions, the first @code{info%nec} elements of
@code{wrk} will contain the residual norms corresponding to the
@code{info%nec} converged solutions.

@c end of table describing the arguments of trlan
@end table

@node    operator interface, , interface of trlan, TRLAN interface
@section Operator interface

TRLAN program require the user to provide his/her own matrix-vector
multiplication routine.  The matrix-vector multiplication routine needs
to have the following interface.

@cindex operator interface
@cindex matrix-vector multiplication
@smallexample
Subroutine OP(nrow, ncol, xin, ldx, yout, ldy)
  Integer, Intent(in) :: nrow, ncol, ldx, ldy
  Double Precision, Dimension(ldx*ncol), Intent(in) :: xin
  Double Precision, Dimension(ldy*ncol), Intent(out) :: yout
End Subroutine OP
@end smallexample

@c table describing the arguments of the operator interface
@table @code

@item nrow
The number of rows on this processor if the problem is distributed using
MPI, otherwise the number of total rows in a Lanczos vector.

@item ncol
The number of vectors (columns in @code{xin} and @code{yout}) to be
multiplied.

@item xin
The array to store the input vectors to be multiplied.  The following
two declarations are equivalent on most machines,
@smallexample
Double Precision, Dimension(1:ldx,1:ncol), Intent(in)::xin
Real*8 xin(1:ldx, 1:ncol)
@end smallexample
The @code{i}th column of @code{xin} is @code{xin((i-1)*ldx+1 :
(i-1)*ldx+nrow)} if @code{xin} is declared as one-dimensional array.  If
the user routine actually declare it as a two-dimensional array, the
@code{i}th column should be @code{xin(1:nrow, i)}.  TRLAN calls OP using
Fortran 77 style argument matching, only starting address of @code{xin}
will be passed.

For those who are familiar with @code{C/C++}: @code{xin} is actually
passed as @code{double *} that points to the first element of array.
Elements in a column are ordered consecutively and the @code{i}th column
starts at @code{(i-1)*ldx}.

@item ldx
The leading dimension of the array @code{xin} when it is declared as
two-dimensional array.

@item yout
The array to store results of the multiplication.  It can be
equivalently declared as
@smallexample
Double Precision,Dimension(1:ldy,1:ncol),Intent(out)::yout
Real*8 yout(1:ldy, 1:ncol)
@end smallexample
The usage notes on @code{xin} also apply to @code{yout}.

@item ldy
The leading dimension of the array @code{yout} when it is declared as
two-dimensional array.

@c end of table describing the arguments of trlan
@end table

This simple interface only has enough information to describe the input
and output vectors.  Here are some possible ways of passing the matrix
information to this subroutine.  In @code{Fortran 90}, we recommend
using a module to encapsulate information related to the matrix.  If
@code{Fortran 77} is used, a @code{common block} may be used for the
same purpose.  Normally, if another language like @code{C} or @code{C++}
is used, the matrix can be packaged in a @code{struct} or a
@code{class}, and accessed through a global variable.

In case the user does not want to write his/her own matrix-vector
multiplication routine.  There are a number of packages out there that
can be used.  Useful software depots and information archives include
@table @code
@item ACM TOMS
@kbd{http://www.acm.org/toms/}
@item ACTS Toolkit
@kbd{http://acts.nersc.gov/}
@item National HPCC Software Exchange
@kbd{http://nhse.cs.utk.edu/}
@item NETLIB
@kbd{http://www.netlib.org}
@item Scientific Application on Linux
@kbd{http://SAL.KachinaTech.COM/}
@end table

@noindent Potentially useful packages include
@table @code
@item Aztec
@kbd{http://www.cs.sandia.gov/CRF/aztec1.html}
@item BlockSolve
@kbd{http://www.mcs.anl.gov/sumaa3d/BlockSolve/}
@item P_SPARSLIB
@kbd{http://www.cs.umn.edu/Research/arpa/p_sparslib/psp-abs.html}
@item PETSc
@kbd{http://www.mcs.anl.gov/petsc/}
@item SPARSKIT
@kbd{http://www.cs.umn.edu/Research/arpa/SPARSKIT/sparskit.html}
@end table

NOTE: All of the packages mentioned above have matrix-vector
multiplications routines.  However some of them are designed for solving
linear systems or even larger granularity tasks, some effort may be
required to directly using their matrix-vector multiplication routines.


@node    Parameters, Miscellaneous, TRLAN interface,       Top
@chapter Recommended parameter choices

@menu
* basis size::
* tolerance::
* restarting scheme::
* maximum iterations::
@end menu

Before calling @code{trlan}, the user needs to decide a few parameters.
The most important parameters are arguments to function
@code{trl_init_info}.  The parameters like @code{nrow}, @code{lohi} and
@code{ned} are determined by the problem to be solved, other parameters
to control the execution of TRLAN might not be familiar to casual users.
This part of the manual will give some recommendations on how to
determine those parameters.

@node basis size, tolerance, , Parameters
@section Selecting the maximum basis size (@code{maxlan})
@cindex maximum basis size

A few factors come into play when picking the maximum basis size
@code{maxlan}, for example, the available computer memory size, the
number of eigenvalues wanted, and the separation of wanted eigenvalues
from the others.  The first rule of thumb is that @code{maxlan} should
at least as large as

@center @code{ned + min(6, ned)}.

Generally, the larger it is, the better TRLAN will perform.  The
limitation on using a very large basis is that there might not be enough
computer memory to store the basis in memory.  Another concern regarding
using a large basis is that the Gram-Schmidt orthogonalization process
will be expensive.  In addition, if the basis size is larger than 1000,
then the time spent in finding the eigenvectors of the projection matrix
may be a substantial portion of the overall execution time.

If the wanted eigenvalues are easier to compute compared to others, then
it does not matter how large the basis size is, the restarted Lanczos
method will find the solutions fairly quickly.  If the wanted
eigenvalues converge slower than the unwanted ones, such as the example
in @ref{Example}, then the above recommended minimum size is too small
to be effective.  In this case, the user should look at how many
eigenvalues were locked and compare it with the number of eigenvalues
converged.  In difficult case, it is not unusually to see a large number
of unwanted eigenpairs converge before the wanted one are finally
computed.  In the previous example, the minimum recommended basis size
is 11.  Since it is relatively small and we know the eigenvalue problem
is relatively hard, we first tried @code{maxlan = 20}.  After 2,000
matrix-vector multiplications, there are two wanted eigenvalues
converged, and six eigenvalues were locked.  After this first test, we
use the following guidelines to choose the next basis size.

@enumerate

@item
Add two to @code{maxlan} for each locked eigenvalue.

@item
Increase the basis size by a factor of @code{ned / nec}.

@end enumerate

@noindent  The first rule suggests the new basis size of about 30 and the
second suggest the next choice could be 50.  The basis size used in the
example is 40.  We are able to find the five smallest eigenvalues with
this choice.  Further tests show that using basis size of 30 can compute
the same 5 eigenvalues in 1056 matrix-vector multiplications, and using
a basis size of 50 TRLAN only need 777 matrix-vector multiplications.
However, in both cases, more time was used.  This demonstrates the
complexity of the choice.  In this particular case, either 30, 40 or 50
is a reasonable choice.

@node tolerance, restarting scheme, basis size, Parameters
@section Selecting the tolerance
@cindex residual tolerance

The convergence test used in this program is @code{r < tol * || A ||}.
Normally, if the matrix is stored, the accuracy of the matrix-vector
multiplication routine is on the order of @code{epsilon * || A ||}.  The
unit round-off error (@code{epsilon}) of a 64-bit IEEE floating-point
number is approximately @code{2.2E-16}.  The default value of @code{tol}
is about @code{1.49E-8}.  Typically, if 5 digits of accuracy is desired
for the eigenvectors, @code{tol} should be set to @code{1E-5}.

@node restarting scheme, maximum iterations, tolerance,Parameters
@section Selecting a restarting scheme
@cindex restarting schemes

This is another parameter that can change the execution time
dramatically.  However, effective restarting schemes are still subject
of active academic researches.  On the example given before, schemes 1
and 2 uses about the same amount of matrix-vector multiplications which
are more than the number of matrix-vector multiplications used with
schemes 3 and 4.  However, because schemes 3 and 4 perform more restarts
and they save more basis vectors during restarting, their restarting
procedures are more expensive.  The actual execution time with schemes 3
and 4 are longer than those with schemes 1 and 2.  Based on these
observations, schemes 3 and 4 are better if the matrix-vector
multiplication is very time-consuming, say, one matrix-vector
multiplication takes more time than an average restart.  If the
matrix-vector multiplication is relatively inexpensive, then schemes 1
and 2 are preferred. Scheme 5 attempts to mimic the restarting strategy
in ARPACK, in many cases, it has comparable performance as the scheme 1.

@node maximum iterations, , restarting scheme, Parameters
@section Selecting the maximum iterations
@cindex maximum matrix-vector multiplication

TRLAN is stopped usually after it has found all the wanted eigenvalues
and the corresponding eigenvectors.  The other normal stopping condition
is to stop after @code{maxmv} number of matrix-vector multiplications.
Typically, we would allow a fixed number of matrix-vector
multiplications for each eigenvalue, for example, 100 per eigenvalue.
When we are trying to find the correct value to use for @code{maxlan}
and @code{restart} we may limit the number of matrix-vector
multiplications used to reduce the time consumed.  The default value in
@code{trl_init_info} is very large especially for large problems.  An
more acceptable limit might be 1000 matrix-vector multiplications per
eigenvalue.  This should be sufficient for most problems.  If more than
1000 matrix-vector multiplications are used to compute one eigenvalue,
other means of computing eigenvalues should be tried.  For example, the
shift-and-invert Lanczos method is often able to compute the desired
eigenvector in a few steps.  The shift-and-invert scheme computes the
extreme eigenvalues of
@ifinfo
@code{inv(A - lambda I)}
@end ifinfo
@tex
$ (A - \lambda I)^{-1} $
@end tex
first, then derive the actual eigenvalues of 
@ifinfo
@code{A}.
@end ifinfo
@tex
$A$.
@end tex
To use this scheme, one need to either invert the matrix or at least
being able to solve linear systems,
@ifinfo
@code{(A - lambda I) u = v}.
@end ifinfo
@tex
$ (A - \lambda I) u = v $.
@end tex
If neither is feasible, then the Davidson method might be an alternative
to consider.

If TRLAN does not return with status 0, consult @ref{debug parameters},
to setup a debugging session, and refer to @ref{error code}, for error
encountered and possible solutions.

@node    Miscellaneous,    About Lanczos,  Parameters, Top
@comment node-name,    next,  previous,      up
@chapter Miscellaneous issues

@menu
* workspace::
* other versions::
* other languages::
* debugging::
* contacting authors::
@end menu

@node workspace, other versions, , Miscellaneous
@section Workspace requirement

@cindex workspace
Some of the issues related to workspace requirements have been mentioned
through out this manual.  This section provide a central location to
collect all the information for ease of reference.

Inside of @code{trlan}, there are three large chucks of workspace,
@code{evec}, @code{base} and @code{misc}.  The user always provides the
array @code{evec}, since it is necessary to carry input and output
information for TRLAN.  Its size is clearly defined in the calling
sequence by @code{lde} and @code{mev}.  The array @code{base} is used to
store the basis vectors if the array @code{evec} can not store
@code{maxlan+1} vectors.  Given the maximum basis size @code{maxlan},
the size of @code{base} is @code{(maxlan + 1 - mev) * nrow)}.  The array
@code{misc} is used to store the projection matrix, the eigenvalues and
eigenvectors of the projection matrix, workspace required by all lower
level routines of TRLAN, library routines from @code{LAPACK} and
@code{BLAS}.  Its size should be no less than @code{maxlan * (maxlan +
10)}.  If it is larger in size, some library routines might run faster.
Thus if there is large amount of computer memory, the user can let TRLAN
use it by pass in a large array @code{wrk}.

If the user provides a workspace @code{wrk} to @code{trlan}, then its
size is checked to see either one of @code{misc} or @code{base} or both
of them can fit inside the workspace.  If at lease one of them can fit
into @code{wrk}, it would be used.  If @code{wrk} is large enough for
both @code{base} and @code{misc}, the array @code{base} will use
@code{(maxlan + 1 - mev) * nrow)} elements and the rest is given to
@code{misc}.  If @code{trlan} can not use @code{wrk}, it will allocate
workspace of appropriate size internally.

If @code{wrk} is provided, its content is not used on input.  However
before returning, @code{trlan} will copy the residual norms of the
converged Ritz pairs in the first @code{nec} elements of @code{wrk}.

@node other versions, other languages, workspace, Miscellaneous
@section Variations of TRLAN

We have isolated the communication needs of TRLAN in four subroutines,
@code{trl_init_info}, @code{trl_sync_flag}, @code{trl_g_sum}, and
@code{trl_g_dot}.  The four subroutines are located in a file called
@file{trl_comm_mpi.f90} for the MPI version and @file{trl_comm_none.f90}
for sequential version.  If the the matrix-vector multiplication routine
and the main program are written for sequential machine, the user can
simply compile with @file{trl_comm_none.f90} to get the sequential
version of the program.  This setup makes it easy to adopt TRLAN for
different types of eigenvalue problems.

The function @code{trl_init_info} is used to initialize the
@code{TRL_INFO_T} type variable to be used by @code{trlan}.  The
function @code{trl_sync_flag} is used to synchronize the status flags
used inside TRLAN.  In the current implementation, it computes the
minimum value of @code{info%stat} on each processor and reset all
@code{info%stat} to the minimum value.  Given that the error flags are
all less than zero (0), if any processor has detected an error, all of
them will be set to indicate an error.  @code{Trl_g_sum} computes the
global sum of an input array and it returns the global sum in the same
array.  The subroutine @code{trl_g_dot} computes the dot-products among
the Lanczos vectors.

If desired, one can change these four routines to suit different
situations.  For example, if the physical domain of the eigenvalue
problem has certain symmetry, usually the discretization does not
contain the whole domain but only a portion of it.  Since not every
element of a vector is stored, the dot-product routine needs to be
modified.  In this case, only @code{trl_g_dot} and @code{trl_g_sum} need
to be modified in order for TRLAN for function properly.

@node other languages, debugging, other versions, Miscellaneous
@section Calling from other languages

TRLAN program is implemented in @code{Fortran 90}.  Since @code{Fortran
90} is backward compatible with previous versions of @code{Fortran}.
There should be no problem to use it in any other @code{Fortran}
program.  However, at the moment, the authors are not aware of a scheme
to reliably access @code{Fortran 90} subroutine with optional arguments,
a subroutine with fixed arguments is created to get around this problem.
The fixed arguments subroutine has the following interface,

@cindex Fortran 77 version
@smallexample
      subroutine trlan77(op, ipar, nrow, mev, eval, evec, lde,
     &                    wrk, lwrk)
      integer ipar(32), nrow, mev, lde, lwrk
      double precision eval(mev), evec(lde, mev), wrk(lwrk)
      external op
@end smallexample

@noindent The @code{Fortran 90} derived type @code{TRL_INFO_T} variable
is removed from this user interface since its primary access function
@code{trl_init_info} contains optional arguments as well.  Here is a
list showing how the integer array @code{ipar} is mapped to the elements
of @code{TRL_INFO_T},

@itemize @minus{}
@item @code{ipar(1)  = stat},
@item @code{ipar(2)  = lohi},
@item @code{ipar(3)  = ned},
@item @code{ipar(4)  = nec},
@item @code{ipar(5)  = maxlan},
@item @code{ipar(6)  = restart},
@item @code{ipar(7)  = maxmv},
@item @code{ipar(8)  = mpicom},
@item @code{ipar(9)  = verbose},
@item @code{ipar(10) = log_io},
@item @code{ipar(11) = iguess},
@item @code{ipar(12) = cpflag},
@item @code{ipar(13) = cpio},
@item @code{ipar(14) = mvop},
@item @code{ipar(24) = locked},
@item @code{ipar(25) = matvec},
@item @code{ipar(26) = nloop},
@item @code{ipar(27) = north},
@item @code{ipar(28) = nrand},
@item @code{ipar(29) = total time in milliseconds},
@item @code{ipar(30) = MATVEC time in milliseconds}.
@item @code{ipar(31) = re-orthogonalization time in milliseconds}.
@item @code{ipar(32) = restarting time in milliseconds}.
@end itemize

@noindent Among the parameters, @code{ipar(2 : 14)} are input parameters,
@code{ipar(1)}, @code{ipar(4)} and @code{ipar(24 : 32)} are output
parameters.

There are two floating-point number elements in @code{TRL_INFO_T},
@code{tol} and @code{crat}.  Before calling @code{trlan77}, the first
element of @code{wrk} should be set to the residual tolerance
@code{tol}.  Inside @code{trlan77}, @code{wrk(1)} is transfered to
@code{tol}.  On return from @code{trlan77}, the first @code{ipar(4)}
elements of @code{wrk} store the residual norms corresponding to the
converged eigenvalues and eigenvectors.  Element @code{ipar(4)+1} of
@code{wrk} will store the last known value of @code{crat}.
@strong{Caution}: Fail to set @code{wrk(1)} to a valid floating-point
number will cause TRLAN to produce floating-point exceptions!

@cindex C/C++
The subroutine @code{trlan77} is relative simple to call from
@code{C/C++}.  The file @file{simplec.c} in the distribution of TRLAN
version @value{TRLVERSION} has equivalent functionalities as
@file{simple.f90} and @file{simple.f77}.

@node debugging, contacting authors, other languages, Miscellaneous
@section Debugging
Here are a few suggestions on what to watch out for when using TRLAN.
Some of suggestions are simply good programming practices.

@itemize @minus{}
@item
Use @code{implicit none} in @code{Fortran} programs.  This is very
effective in catching typos.  It is also a good practice to check the
programs with automated tools such as @code{lint} and @code{ftnchek}.

@item
Make sure the arrays passed to TRLAN have correct dimensions and make
sure the argument @code{lwrk} is actually the size of array @code{wrk}.

@item
Make sure all input variables to TRLAN are initialized correctly and
arguments to @code{trlan} matches arguments to @code{trl_init_info}.

@item
When encountering problems, turn on debugging options in TRLAN by
calling @code{trl_set_debug} prior to calling @code{trlan}.  Set the
ninth and tenth element of array @code{ipar} to appropriate values when
@code{trlan77} is used.  Consult @ref{debug parameters} to setup a
debugging session.  Refer to @ref{error code} for error encountered and
possible solutions.

@item
If all above have been done and there is still a problem, contact the
author at the address given in @ref{contacting authors}.
@end itemize

@node contacting authors, , debugging, Miscellaneous
@section Contacting the authors

@cindex authors' email
The authors of TRLAN and this document can be contacted at the following
email addresses: @code{kwu@@lbl.gov} (Kesheng Wu),
@code{hdsimon@@lbl.gov} (Horst Simon).  Kesheng Wu can also be reached
at @code{kwu@@ieee.org} and @code{kwu@@computer.org}.  The authors also
maintain their own research pages on the web at
@kbd{http://www.nersc.gov/~kewu} and
@kbd{http://www.nersc.gov/research/SIMON}.  The updated software package
can also be found at both web addresses.

@node About Lanczos, Index, Miscellaneous, Top
@chapter References

This is a list books and research papers on the Lanczos algorithm and
restarting.  @xref{operator interface}, for a list of software archives.

@cindex references
@enumerate
@item
J. Baglama, D. Calvetti, and L. Reichel.
Iterative methods for the computation of a few eigenvalues of a large
symmetric matrix.
@emph{BIT}, 36:400--421, 1996.

@item
F. Chatelin.  @emph{Eigenvalues of Matrices}.  Wiley, 1993.

@item
J. Cullum and R. A. Willoughby.  @emph{Lanczos Algorithms for Large
Symmetric Eigenvalue Computations: Theory}, volume 3 of @emph{Progress
in Scientific Computing}.  Birkhauser, Boston, 1985.

@item
J. Cullum and R. A. Willoughby.  @emph{Lanczos Algorithms for Large
Symmetric Eigenvalue Computations: Programs}, volume 4 of @emph{Progress
in Scientific Computing}.  Birkhauser, Boston, 1985.

@item
T. Ericsson and A. Ruhe.
The spectral transformation Lanczos method for numerical solution
of large sparse generalized symmetric eigenvalue problems.
@emph{Math. Comp.}, 35:1251--1268, 1980.

@item
R. G. Grimes, J. G. Lewis, and H. D. Simon.
A shifted block Lanczos algorithm for solving sparse symmetric
  generalized eigenproblems.
@emph{SIAM J. Matrix Anal. Appl.}, 15(1):228--272, 1994.

@item
Beresford N. Parlett.
@emph{The symmetric eigenvalue problem}.
SIAM, Philadelphia, PA, 1998.

@item
A. Ruhe.
Rational Krylov sequence methods for eigenvalue computation.
@emph{Lin. Alg. Appl.}, 58:391--405, 1984.

@item
A. Ruhe.
Rational Krylov algorithm for nonsymmetric eigenvalue problems
  II: matrix pairs.
@emph{Lin. Alg. Appl.}, 197/198:283--296, 1994.

@item
A. Ruhe.
The rational Krylov algorithm for nonsymmetric eigenvalue problems
  III: Complex shifts for real matrices.
@emph{BIT}, 34:165--176, 1994.

@item
Yousef Saad.
@emph{Numerical Methods for Large Eigenvalue Problems}.
Manchester University Press, 1993.

@item
D. S. Sorensen.
Implicit application of polynomial filters in a K-step Arnoldi
  method.
@emph{SIAM J. Matrix Anal. Appl.}, 13(1):357--385, 1992.

@item
A. Stathopoulos, Y. Saad, and K. Wu.
Dynamic thick restarting of the Davidson and the implicitly
  restarted Arnoldi methods.
Technical Report UMSI 96/123, Minnesota Supercomputer Institute,
  University of Minnesota, 1996.

@item
K. Wu and H. Simon.
Thick-restart Lanczos method for symmetric eigenvalue problems.
Technical Report 41412, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1998.

@item
K. Wu and H. Simon.
Dynamic Retarting Schemes For Thick-Restart Lanczos Method.
Technical Report xxxxx, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 1999.

@end enumerate


@node    Index,    ,  About Lanczos, Top
@comment node-name,    next,  previous,      up
@unnumbered Index
@printindex cp

@bye
